Many problems involve
some amount of delayed reward.
A store manager could lower
their prices and sell off
their entire inventory to
maximize short term gain.
But they would do better
in the long run by
maintaining inventory to sell
when the demand is high.
In reinforcement learning, reward
captures the notion
of short-term gain.
The objective
however, is to learn
a policy that achieves
the most reward in the long run.
Value functions formalize
what this means.
By the end of this video,
you'll be able to;
describe the roles of
the state value and
action value functions
in reinforcement learning,
describe the relationship between
value functions and policies,
and create examples of
value functions for a given MDP.
Roughly speaking, a
state value function
is the future award
an agent can expect to
receive starting from
a particular state.
More precisely, the
state value function
is the expected return
from a given state.
The agent's behavior
will also determine
how much total reward
it can expect.
So a value function is
defined with respect
to a given policy.
The subscript Pi indicates
the value function is contingent
on the agent selecting
actions according to Pi.
Likewise, a subscript Pi
on the expectation
indicates that the expectation is
computed with respect
to the policy Pi.
We can also define
an action value function.
An action value
describes what happens
when the agent first selects
a particular action.
More formally, the action
value of a state is
the expected return if
the agent selects action
A and then follows policy Pi.
Value functions are crucial
in reinforce learning,
they allow an agent to
query the quality of
its current situation instead of
waiting to observe
the long-term outcome.
The benefit is twofold.
First, the return is not
immediately available and second,
the return may be random
due to stochasticity in
both the policy and
environment dynamics.
The value function summarizes
all the possible futures
by averaging over returns.
Ultimately, we care most
about learning a good policy.
Value function enable us to judge
the quality of
different policies.
For example, consider an agent
playing the game of chess.
Chess has an episodic MDP,
the state is given by
the positions of
all the pieces on the board,
the actions are the legal moves,
and termination
occurs when the game
ends in either a win,
loss, or draw.
We could define the reward
as plus one for
winning and zero for
all the other moves.
This reward does not
tell us much about
how well the agent is
playing during the match,
we'll have to wait
until the end of
the game to see
any non-zero reward.
The value function
tells us much more.
The state value is equal to
the expected sum
of future rewards.
Since the only possible
non-zero reward
is plus one for winning,
the state value is simply
the probability of
winning if we follow
the current policy Pi.
In this two player game,
the opponent's move is part
of the state transition.
For example, the environ
moves both the agents piece,
circled in blue, and
the opponent's piece,
circled in red.
This puts the board into
a new state, S prime.
Note, the value of
state S prime is
lower than the value
of state S. This means
we are less likely
to win the game from
this new state assuming we
continue following policy Pi.
An action value
function would allow
us to assess the
probability of winning
for each possible move given
we follow the policy Pi
for the rest of the game.
To build some intuition,
let's look at
a simple continuing MDP.
The states are defined by
the locations on the grid,
the actions move the agent up,
down, left, or right.
The agent cannot
move off the grid
and bumping generates
a reward of minus one.
Most other actions
yield no reward.
There are two special
states however,
these special states
are labeled A and B.
Every action in state
A yields plus 10
reward and plus five
reward in state B.
Every action in state A and
B transitions the agents
to states A prime and
B prime respectively.
Remember, we must specify
the policy before we
can figure out what
the value function is.
Let's look at
the uniform random policy.
Since this is a continuing task,
we need to specify Gamma,
let's go with 0.9.
Later, we will learn
several ways to
compute and estimate
the value function,
but this time we'll be nice
to you and computed for you.
On the right, we have written
the value of each state.
First, notice the negative
values near the bottom,
these values are low
because the agent is
likely to bump into
the wall before reaching
the distance states A and B.
Remember, A and B are both
the only sources of
positive reward in this MDP.
State A has the highest value,
notice that the value is
less than 10 wven though
every action from
state A generates
a reward of plus 10, why?
Because every transition
from A moves the agent
close to the lower wall
and near the lower wall,
the random policy is likely
to bump and get negative reward.
On the other hand, the value of
state B is slightly
greater than five.
The transition from B moves
the agent to the middle.
In the middle, the agent
is unlikely to
bump and is close to
the high-valued states A and B.
It's really quite amazing
how the value function
compactly summarizes
all these possibilities.
In this video, we
introduce the definitions
of state and action
value functions.
Soon, we will discuss how
value functions can be computed.
For now, you should understand
that a state value function
refers to the
expected return from
a given state under
a specific policy,
and an action value function
refers to the
expected return from
a given state after selecting
a particular action and then
following a given policy.